GLIMPSE: Glioblastoma Layered Integration of Multi-Omics for Pathogenesis and Survival Estimation

In this study, we aimed to develop a pipeline that accurately characterizes GBM pathology and prognosis through an integration of transcriptomic and methylomic data. We utilized high quality reference datasets (scRNA-seq, bulk RNA-seq, purified methylation tumor and normal sets) from which we were able to identify 67 DEGs and 38020 DMPs. We investigated their biological significance through GO and KEGG pathway enrichment, finding enriched HIF-1 signaling, metabolic regulation, neurodegenerative disease, and neuronal development pathways. We annotated the 38020 DMPs to their nearest gene by genome coordinates, and overlapped this list with the 67 DEGs to achieve a final filter of 26 genes and 72 CpG sites. We applied this filter to TCGA-GBM, performed dimensionality reduction into principal components, enriched the dataset with second polynomial features, and trained an Elastic Net model to predict a patient’s overall survival in terms of days to death. This model demonstrates utility in clinical settings to help physicians determine the best course of action when treating a patient to ensure they receive the highest quality treatment. We achieved a correlation coefficient of 0.9685 and RMSE of ± 96.488 days. We then trained a second elastic net model on the same genes and CpG sites but without any enrichment or dimensionality reduction in order to obtain proper coefficients and features for survival analysis. Finally, we identified the top 5 genes and CpG sites based on their coefficient weight, fitted a Cox model to assess hazard ratio, and plotted kaplan-meier curves to categorize samples into high and low risk cohorts. The features we found are particularly noteworthy as they suggest potential targets for future therapeutic interventions and provide insight into the molecular underpinnings of GBM.Additionally, using the final features, we propose a therapeutic approach that targets the DMPs associated with the significant genes utilizing epigenome editing methods for a precise treatment system. 

Link to poster (3/2024): https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/18WAjvelYU8SSZxVcBRKOD-ztmjq0fuYE/edit?usp=sharing&ouid=110755970238511801589&rtpof=true&sd=true
